Print For: Guest
Page 1 of 4
Printed: 18.05.2026
Consumer Protection (Mediation) Rules, 2020
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(Department of Consumer Affairs)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 15th July, 2020
(Amended up to 15.07.2020)
G.S.R. 450(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and
clauses (r) and (zf) of sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the Central Government hereby makes the
following rules, namely:—
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) These rules may be called the
Consumer Protection (Mediation) Rules, 2020.
(2) They shall come into force on the 20th day of July, 2020.
2. Definitions—(1) ln these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Act” means the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019);
(b) “Commission” means District Commission, State Commission or
National Commission, as the case may be;
(c) “mediation cell” means a consumer mediation cell established in
accordance with the provisions of section 74;
(d) “panel” means a panel of mediators prepared by the Commission
under sub-section (1) of section 75;
(e) “Parties” means parties to a dispute;
(f) “Settlement” means a settlement arrived at in the course of
mediation.
(2) All other words and expressions used in the rules and not defined but
defined in the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019) shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3. Mediation Cell.– (1) Every Mediation Cell set up in a Commission, shall
have a panel of mediators on the recommendation of a selection committee
consisting of the President and a member of that Commission.
(2) The Mediation Cell shall have such support staff as may be decided by
IBC Laws
®
www.ibclaw.in
Print For: Guest
Page 2 of 4
Printed: 18.05.2026
the President of that Commission in consultation with the concerned
Government and that Government shall provide all administrative
assistance and infrastructure facilities required by the Commission
4. Matters not to be referred to mediation. – The following matters shall
not be referred to mediation, namely:—
(a) the matters relating to proceedings in respect of medical negligence
resulting in grievous injury or death;
(b) matters which relate to defaults or offences for which applications
for compounding of offences have been made by one or more parties;
(c) cases involving serious and specific allegations of fraud, fabrication
of documents, forgery, impersonation, coercion;
(d) cases relating to prosecution for criminal and non-compoundable
offences;
(e) cases which involve public interest or the interest of numerous
persons who are not parties before the Commission:
Provided that, in any case other than those mentioned in this rule, the
Commission before which the case is pending may choose not to refer it to
mediation if it appears to the Commission that no elements of a settlement
exist which may be acceptable to the parties or that mediation is otherwise
not appropriate having regard to the circumstances of the case and the
respective positions of the parties.
5. Refund of fee.—Where the Commission refers the parties to mediation,
the complainant shall be entitled to receive full amount of application fee
paid in respect of such complaint, if a settlement is reached between such
parties.
6. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings.—The parties shall not
initiate any arbitral or judicial proceedings in respect of a matter which is
the subject-matter of the mediation and also when such parties have
expressly undertaken not to initiate any such proceeding.
7. Settlement agreement not to be discharged by death of party
thereto.—(1) A settlement agreement shall not be discharged by the death
of any party thereto and shall be enforceable by or against the legal
IBC Laws
®
www.ibclaw.in
Print For: Guest
Page 3 of 4
Printed: 18.05.2026
representative of the deceased party.
(2) Nothing in this rule shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of
which any right of action is extinguished by the death of a person.
[F. No. J-10/2/2020-CPU]
AMIT MEHTA, Jt. Secy.
Access complete Bare Act here. To research Section and sub-section wise
judgments, visit here.
Join WhatsApp Channel
Subscribe now
Join WhatsApp Channel
Subscribe Now
Dashboard/OnePage
Case Laws Portal
Bare Acts/Legal Contents
IBC Commentary
IBC Laws
®
www.ibclaw.in
Print For: Guest
Page 4 of 4
Printed: 18.05.2026
Arbitration Portal
Case Citation
Weekly Bulletins
Articles
e-Journals
Annual Case Digest
Testimonials
Follow for daily updates:
Facebook
LinkedIn
Telegram
X
WhatsApp
YouTube
Download Mobile App
Subscribe Daily Email Newsletter
